when I was four years old my dad taught
me the Taos Pueblo hoop dance a
traditional dance born hundreds of years
ago in southwestern USA a series of
hoops are created out of Willow Wood and
they're threaded together to create
formations of the natural world showing
the many beauties of life in this dance
you're circling in a constant spin
mimicking the movement of the Sun and
the passage of time watching this dance
was magic to me like with a time capsule
I was taking a look through a cultural
window to the past I felt a deeper
connection to how my ancestors used to
look at the world around them
since then I've always been obsessed
with time capsules they take on many
forms but the common thread is that
they're uncontrollably fascinating to us
as human beings because they're portals
to a memory and they hold the important
power of keeping stories alive as a
filmmaker and composer it's been my
journey to find my voice reclaim the
stories of my heritage and the past and
infuse them into music and film time
capsules to share to tell you a bit
about how I found my voice I'd like to
share a bit about how I grew up in
Southern California I grew up in a
multi-generational home meaning I lived
under the same roof as my parents aunts
uncles and grandparents my mother is
Dutch Indonesian and Chinese with
immigrant parents and my father is
Ojibwe and an enrolled tribal member of
the pray bands Potawatomi tribe in
northeastern Kansas so one weekend I'd
be learning how to fold dumplings and
the next I'd be traditional style
dancing at a powwow immersed in the
powerful sounds of drums and singers
being surrounded by many cultures was
the norm but also a very confusing
experience it was really hard for me to
find my voice because I never felt I was
enough never Chinese
Dutch Indonesian or native enough
because I never felt I was a part of any
community I thought to learn the stories
of my heritage and connect them together
to rediscover my own and the first
medium I felt gave me a voice was music
with layers of sounds and multiple
instruments I could create sound scapes
and worlds that were much bigger than my
own through music I'm inviting you into
a sonic portal of my memories and
emotions and I'm holding up a mirror to
yours one of my favorite instruments to
play is the GU Jiang's either a Chinese
harp like instrument while the hoop
dances hundreds of years old
the gu Jiang has more than 2,000 years
of history I'm playing the styles that
greatly influenced me today like
electronic music with an instrument that
was used to play traditional folk music
long ago and I noticed an interesting
connection the zither is tuned to the
pentatonic scale a scale that is
universally known in so many parts of
music around the world including Native
American folk songs in both Chinese and
Native fulk I sense this inherent sound
of longing and holding on to the past an
emotion that greatly drives the music I
create today at the time I wondered if I
could make this feeling of immersion
even more powerful by layering visuals
and music visuals and images on top of
the music so I turned to internet
tutorials to learn editing software went
to Community College to save money and
created films after a few years
experimenting I was 17 and had something
I wanted to tell and preserve it started
with a question what happens when a
story is forgotten I lead with this in
my latest documentary film smoke that
travels which immerses people into the
world of music song color and dance as I
explore my fear that a part of my
identity my native heritage will be
forgotten in time many indigenous
languages are dying due to historically
forced assimilation from the late 1800s
to the early night
1870s Natives were forced into boarding
schools where they were violently
punished if they practiced traditional
ways or spoke their native language most
of which were orally passed down as of
now there are 567 federally recognized
tribes in the United States when there
used to be countless more in my father's
words being native is not about wearing
long hair in braids it's not about
feathers or beadwork it's about the way
we all center ourselves in the world as
human beings after traveling with this
film for over a year I met indigenous
people from around the world from the
Ainu of Japan sami of scandinavia the
maori and many more and they were all
dealing with the exact same struggle to
preserve their language and culture at
this moment I not only realized the
power storytelling has to connect all of
us as human beings but the
responsibility that comes with this
power it could become incredibly
dangerous when our stories are rewritten
or ignored because when we are denied
identity we become invisible we are all
storytellers reclaiming our narratives
and just listening to each other's can
create a portal that can transcend time
itself thank you
[Applause]
[Music]